feat: Terralith article (#29)
masterpointio/masterpoint.io: content/updates/terralith-monolithic-terraform-architecture.md

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "The Terralith: Monolithic Architecture of Terraform & Infrastructure as Code"
author: Yangci Ou
slug: terralith-monolithic-terraform-architecture

> date: 2024-08-20 # TODO TBD

Author: TODO

Author: updated

---
visible: true
draft: false
title: "The Terralith: Monolithic Architecture of Terraform & Infrastructure as Code"
author: Yangci Ou
slug: terralith-monolithic-terraform-architecture

> date: 2024-08-20 # TODO TBD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-08-22
```

  - [Collaborating in a Terralith](#collaborating-in-a-terralith)
  - [State File Bloat -> Plans + Applies Slow Down](#state-file-bloat-plans-and-applies-slow-down)
  - [Blast Radius: Walking Through a Minefield](#blast-radius-walking-through-a-minefield)
- [What To Do About It / Avoiding a Terralith](#what-to-do-about-it--avoiding-a-terralith)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## What is a Terralith?

In the world of software engineering, we often hear about monolithic architecture, which is a model of software built with multiple components combined into a single program. Tightly coupled services live together. Updating or deploying one requires updating or deploying all of them. At a certain scale, this can be very painful.

In this post, we’ll explore a similar concept in the realm of Infrastructure as Code (IaC): the “Terralith.” This term is derived from the words “Terraform” and “monolith.” While not an official term, it was first coined by Nicki Watt of OpenCredo during [a HashiCorp Terraform talk](https://www.hashicorp.com/resources/evolving-infrastructure-terraform-opencredo).

> A Terralith is a Terraform or OpenTofu (which will be collectively referred to as "TF") project which manages multiple infrastructure across the platform within one root module (i.e., one state file). While a monolithic software application might have all its services contained within one codebase, ranging in functionality from authentication to payments to business logic, a Terralith codebase might represent the majority of the infrastructure in a single root module, including networking, compute, and storage. A single massive root module that contains all the infrastructure definitions sounds like trying to cram an entire city into one skyscraper!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Terralith is a Terraform or OpenTofu (which will be collectively referred to as "TF") project which manages many infrastructure resources across the platform within one [root module](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#the-root-module) (i.e., one state file). While a monolithic software application might have all its services contained within one codebase, ranging in functionality from authentication to payments to business logic, a Terralith codebase might represent the majority of the infrastructure in a single root module, including networking, compute, and storage. A single massive root module that contains all the infrastructure definitions is like trying to cram an entire city into one skyscraper!
```

> A Terralith is a Terraform or OpenTofu (which will be collectively referred to as "TF") project which manages multiple infrastructure across the platform within one root module (i.e. one state file). While a monolithic software application might have all its services contained within one codebase, ranging in functionality from authentication to payments to business logic, a Terralith codebase might represent the majority of the infrastructure in a single root module, including networking, compute, and storage. A single massive root module that contains all the infrastructure definitions sounds like trying to cram an entire city into one skyscraper!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Terralith is a Terraform or OpenTofu (which will be collectively referred to as "TF") project which manages multiple infrastructure across the platform within one root module (i.e., one state file). While a monolithic software application might have all its services contained within one codebase, ranging in functionality from authentication to payments to business logic, a Terralith codebase might represent the majority of the infrastructure in a single root module, including networking, compute, and storage. A single massive root module that contains all the infrastructure definitions sounds like trying to cram an entire city into one skyscraper!
```

The Terralith is the simplest pattern in any new IaC project organization, and as such, it is one of the most common starting points. The defining characteristic of a Terralith is a [single state file](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/state/) that holds the entire state of the infrastructure. All infrastructure is provisioned from a single root module where it continuously expands as requirements grow. This centralized approach can seem appealing at first, but we’ll point out the issues that come from this pattern later.

Below is an example of a Terralith. Although there are some reusability through [child modules](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#child-modules), it still has a monolithic root module. This means that all resources are managed in **_one singular state file_** and therefore tightly coupled together:

> ![Terralith Monolith Example File Structure](/img/updates/terralith/terralith-file-structure-example.png) <!-- Made with carbon.now.sh and Excalidraw -->

Reviewer: This image is awesome Yang -- well done! 🙌

Author: ![yay](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/da359fe0-9bb5-4ffd-899d-c60778fea908)

> Below is an example of a Terralith. Although there are some reusability through [child modules](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#child-modules), it still has a monolithic root module. This means that all resources are managed in **_one singular state file_** and therefore tightly coupled together:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a Terralith. Although there is some reusability through [child modules](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/modules/#child-modules), it still has a monolithic root module. This means that all resources are managed in **_one singular state file_** and therefore tightly coupled together:
```

## Why It’s Bad: Pitfalls & The Scalability Ceiling of Terraliths

At first glance, a Terralith might seem like a good idea. It simplifies the initial setup and is easy to manage. You don’t have to worry about running multiple `tf apply` commands, splitting configurations, or managing multiple states. Everything is in one place which makes it easy to navigate, modify, and deploy.

> However, as your infrastructure grows, the Terralith approach becomes problematic. Let’s examine why.

Author: ```suggestion
However, as your infrastructure grows, the Terralith approach becomes problematic. Let's examine some of the reasons why.
```

###### Collaborating in a Terralith
Collaboration in a Terralith setup can be challenging as well. Since all the resources are provisioned with one root module, state is stored in one file. A common best practice in TF is to use [state locking](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/locking), which locks the state file so only one operation can be executed at a given time. This is intended to prevent odd drift scenarios and state file corruption.

Because of this practice, two engineers working on completely different infrastructure in the Terralith at the same time can find themselves unable to perform state operations concurrently.

Here is a diagram of what that might look like in practice. This highlights the hit to engineering productivity that the Terralith causes:

> ![Collaboration in a Terralith](/img/updates/terralith/terralith-collaboration.png) <!-- Made with Excalidraw -->

Reviewer: Love the small logo 💯

###### State File Bloat: Plans and Applies Slow Down

> Imagine a Terralith’s state file like a single, massive spreadsheet tracking every item in a rapidly growing warehouse. Eventually, it becomes so large that opening it or updating it takes forever.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imagine a Terralith’s state file like a single, massive spreadsheet tracking every item in a rapidly growing warehouse. Eventually, it becomes so large that comparing the current state of the resources with the state recorded in the file or updating it takes forever.
```
We rarely open state files; I'd rather focus on slowing down the refresh operation.

> In IaC, the workflow first checks all resources against the real infrastructure, then plans the changes from your infrastructure code, and finally executes the plan by applying it. Even if we are trying to modify something as minor as renaming one resource, the system must verify against every single resource in the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In IaC, the workflow first checks all resources against the real infrastructure, then plans the changes from your infrastructure code, and finally executes the plan by applying it. Even if we are trying to modify something as minor as renaming one resource, **the system must verify against every single resource in the state file**.
```

It’s a domino effect because this not only slows down the development and deployment process, but also increases the vulnerability to transient errors such as credential expirations and API rate limits. At Masterpoint, we've had clients with Terralith codebases which took over 30+ minutes for simple plans and applies. As you can imagine, they often timed out or reached the API limits.

![Terralith API Limit Example](/img/updates/terralith/terralith-api-limit-example.png)

> ###### Blast Radius: Walking Through a Minefield

Reviewer: For some reason, this header doesn't have padding from the above image. Can you look into that?

Author: Strange thing in the markdown conversion to HTML, a standalone image like this comment is an isolated <img> tag, but when there is a comment on the same line of that markdown image, it wraps it in <p><img></p> which is what gives the other images padding (consistent with the whole page since it uses <p>'s). Added a comment for that padding.

A Terralith cannot deploy only one change, leaving the team stuck and the application unfixed, despite the changes being unrelated.

[Targeted applies](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/state/resource-targeting) can provide temporary relief for Terralith challenges. These update specific resources or modules within your IaC without applying the whole configuration. But targeted applies are a band-aid solution as they do not solve the root problem of a Terralith.

![Terralith Blast Radius](/img/updates/terralith/terralith-blast-radius.png)

## What To Do About It / Avoiding a Terralith
Recognizing the limitations of a Terralith architecture in Infrastructure as Code is the first step towards a more scalable and maintainable solution. While there's no one-size-fits-all process, the transition typically involves breaking down the monolithic root module into smaller, more manageable pieces. You can use a [strangler pattern](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/StranglerFigApplication.html) - modularization allows for better organization of resources, improved reusability, and easier management of complex infrastructure services.

> Breaking up a monolithic Terraform architecture is like splitting each floor of the skyscraper into its own separate building in our earlier analogy. Now, changes to the “residential” portion won’t affect the “commercial” portion. Each structure can be managed independently, solving the problems mentioned in the above sections.

Author: ```suggestion
Breaking up a monolithic TF architecture is like splitting each floor of the skyscraper into its own separate building in our earlier analogy. Now, changes to the “residential” portion won’t affect the “commercial” portion. Each structure can be managed independently, solving the problems mentioned in the above sections.
```

> Of course, there are scenarios where a Terralith might make  sense, such as smaller projects , prototyping, and proof of concepts. “But as you evolve, as you have more teams and more complicated setups, you need to think about [blast radius, state management, and architecture],” as said by [Nicki Watt](https://www.hashicorp.com/resources/evolving-infrastructure-terraform-opencredo).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, there are scenarios where a Terralith might make sense, such as smaller projects, prototyping, and proof of concepts. “But as you evolve, as you have more teams and more complicated setups, you need to think about [blast radius, state management, and architecture],” as said by [Nicki Watt](https://www.hashicorp.com/resources/evolving-infrastructure-terraform-opencredo).
```

While the specific end structure will vary based on organizational needs, a general approach to breaking up a Terralith involves splitting infrastructure into different services and drawing clear boundaries around them. You have a few options to do this. At Masterpoint, we typically create root modules at the service boundary: AWS RDS clusters, AWS SQS Queues, Lambda Functions, and ECS Services all get their own root module. Then we instantiate instances of these root modules with specific configuration for each time the service is used within our client’s infrastructure. For example, if you have a prod and a staging database, the same AWS RDS root module would be configured differently and used two times.

> [TF Workspaces](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/state/workspaces/) is another method to  manage this complexity. By leveraging workspaces, teams can maintain separation between environments (and thus different backend state storage) while reusing the same TF codebase. This approach adheres to the [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) principle, reducing duplication and helping some of the pitfalls mentioned above.

Reviewer: This just confused me and I don't think it's necessary. Feel free to disagree / push back if you feel we should mention this!

```suggestion
[TF Workspaces](https://opentofu.org/docs/language/state/workspaces/) is another method to  manage this complexity. By leveraging workspaces, teams can maintain separation between environments while reusing the same TF codebase. This approach adheres to the [DRY](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) principle, reducing duplication and helping some of the pitfalls mentioned above.
```

Author: Agreed, on second read!
